the project gutenberg ebook of frankenstein, by mary shelley

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org


title: frankenstein
       or, the modern prometheus

author: mary shelley

release date: december 10, 2012 [ebook #41445]

language: english

character set encoding: utf-8

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook frankenstein ***




produced by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online
distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net










                             frankenstein;

                                  or,

                         the modern prometheus.

[transcriber's note: this text was produced from a photo-reprint of the
1818 edition.]


    in three volumes.
    vol. i.

    london:

    _printed for_
    lackington, hughes, harding, mavor, & jones,
    finsbury square.

    1818.

       *       *       *       *       *

    did i request thee, maker, from my clay
    to mould me man? did i solicit thee
    from darkness to promote me?----

                                  paradise lost.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          _to_
                     william godwin,
    _author of political justice, caleb williams, &c._
                      these volumes
               _are respectfully inscribed_
                           by
                       the author.




preface.


the event on which this fiction is founded has been supposed, by dr.
darwin, and some of the physiological writers of germany, as not of
impossible occurrence. i shall not be supposed as according the remotest
degree of serious faith to such an imagination; yet, in assuming it as
the basis of a work of fancy, i have not considered myself as merely
weaving a series of supernatural terrors. the event on which the
interest of the story depends is exempt from the disadvantages of a mere
tale of spectres or enchantment. it was recommended by the novelty of
the situations which it developes; and, however impossible as a physical
fact, affords a point of view to the imagination for the delineating of
human passions more comprehensive and commanding than any which the
ordinary relations of existing events can yield.

i have thus endeavoured to preserve the truth of the elementary
principles of human nature, while i have not scrupled to innovate
upon their combinations. the _iliad_, the tragic poetry of
greece,--shakespeare, in the _tempest_ and _midsummer night’s
dream_,--and most especially milton, in _paradise lost_, conform to this
rule; and the most humble novelist, who seeks to confer or receive
amusement from his labours, may, without presumption, apply to prose
fiction a licence, or rather a rule, from the adoption of which so many
exquisite combinations of human feeling have resulted in the highest
specimens of poetry.

the circumstance on which my story rests was suggested in casual
conversation. it was commenced, partly as a source of amusement, and
partly as an expedient for exercising any untried resources of mind.
other motives were mingled with these, as the work proceeded. i am by no
means indifferent to the manner in which whatever moral tendencies exist
in the sentiments or characters it contains shall affect the reader; yet
my chief concern in this respect has been limited to the avoiding of the
enervating effects of the novels of the present day, and to the
exhibitions of the amiableness of domestic affection, and the excellence
of universal virtue. the opinions which naturally spring from the
character and situation of the hero are by no means to be conceived as
existing always in my own conviction; nor is any inference justly to be
drawn from the following pages as prejudicing any philosophical doctrine
of whatever kind.

it is a subject also of additional interest to the author, that this
story was begun in the majestic region where the scene is principally
laid, and in society which cannot cease to be regretted. i passed the
summer of 1816 in the environs of geneva. the season was cold and rainy,
and in the evenings we crowded around a blazing wood fire, and
occasionally amused ourselves with some german stories of ghosts, which
happened to fall into our hands. these tales excited in us a playful
desire of imitation. two other friends (a tale from the pen of one of
whom would be far more acceptable to the public than any thing i can
ever hope to produce) and myself agreed to write each a story, founded
on some supernatural occurrence.

the weather, however, suddenly became serene; and my two friends left me
on a journey among the alps, and lost, in the magnificent scenes which
they present, all memory of their ghostly visions. the following tale is
the only one which has been completed.




frankenstein;

or, the

_modern prometheus._




letter i.


_to mrs._ saville, _england_.

st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17--.

you will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the
commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
forebodings. i arrived here yesterday; and my first task is to assure my
dear sister of my welfare, and increasing confidence in the success of
my undertaking.

i am already far north of london; and as i walk in the streets of
petersburgh, i feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
braces my nerves, and fills me with delight. do you understand this
feeling? this breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which
i am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. inspirited by
this wind of promise, my day dreams become more fervent and vivid. i try
in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and
desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of
beauty and delight. there, margaret, the sun is for ever visible; its
broad disk just skirting the horizon, and diffusing a perpetual
splendour. there--for with your leave, my sister, i will put some trust
in preceding navigators--there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing
over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in
beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. its
productions and features may be without example, as the phænomena of the
heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. what
may not be expected in a country of eternal light? i may there discover
the wondrous power which attracts the needle; and may regulate a
thousand celestial observations, that require only this voyage to render
their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. i shall satiate my
ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before
visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man.
these are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of
danger or death, and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with
the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday
mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. but, supposing
all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable
benefit which i shall confer on all mankind to the last generation, by
discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which
at present so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret
of the magnet, which, if at all possible, can only be effected by an
undertaking such as mine.

these reflections have dispelled the agitation with which i began my
letter, and i feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to
heaven; for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as a
steady purpose,--a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye.
this expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. i have
read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have been
made in the prospect of arriving at the north pacific ocean through the
seas which surround the pole. you may remember, that a history of all
the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our
good uncle thomas’s library. my education was neglected, yet i was
passionately fond of reading. these volumes were my study day and night,
and my familiarity with them increased that regret which i had felt, as
a child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction had forbidden my
uncle to allow me to embark in a sea-faring life.

these visions faded when i perused, for the first time, those poets
whose effusions entranced my soul, and lifted it to heaven. i also
became a poet, and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation;
i imagined that i also might obtain a niche in the temple where the
names of homer and shakespeare are consecrated. you are well acquainted
with my failure, and how heavily i bore the disappointment. but just at
that time i inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were
turned into the channel of their earlier bent.

six years have passed since i resolved on my present undertaking. i can,
even now, remember the hour from which i dedicated myself to this great
enterprise. i commenced by inuring my body to hardship. i accompanied
the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the north sea; i voluntarily
endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; i often worked harder
than the common sailors during the day, and devoted my nights to the
study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of
physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest
practical advantage. twice i actually hired myself as an under-mate in
a greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. i must own i
felt a little proud, when my captain offered me the second dignity in
the vessel, and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness; so
valuable did he consider my services.

and now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great
purpose. my life might have been passed in ease and luxury; but i
preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path. oh,
that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative! my courage
and my resolution is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are
often depressed. i am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage;
the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: i am required not
only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own,
when their’s are failing.

this is the most favourable period for travelling in russia. they fly
quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an english stage-coach. the
cold is not excessive, if you are wrapt in furs, a dress which i have
already adopted; for there is a great difference between walking the
deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise
prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. i have no
ambition to lose my life on the post-road between st. petersburgh and
archangel.

i shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my
intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying
the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as i think
necessary among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. i do not
intend to sail until the month of june: and when shall i return? ah,
dear sister, how can i answer this question? if i succeed, many, many
months, perhaps years, will pass before you and i may meet. if i fail,
you will see me again soon, or never.

farewell, my dear, excellent, margaret. heaven shower down blessings on
you, and save me, that i may again and again testify my gratitude for
all your love and kindness.

your affectionate brother,

r. walton.




letter ii.


_to mrs._ saville, _england_.

archangel, 28th march, 17--.

how slowly the time passes here, encompassed as i am by frost and snow;
yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. i have hired a vessel,
and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom i have already
engaged appear to be men on whom i can depend, and are certainly
possessed of dauntless courage.

but i have one want which i have never yet been able to satisfy; and the
absence of the object of which i now feel as a most severe evil. i have
no friend, margaret: when i am glowing with the enthusiasm of success,
there will be none to participate my joy; if i am assailed by
disappointment, no one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. i
shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium
for the communication of feeling. i desire the company of a man who
could sympathize with me; whose eyes would reply to mine. you may deem
me romantic, my dear sister, but i bitterly feel the want of a friend. i
have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as
well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve
or amend my plans. how would such a friend repair the faults of your
poor brother! i am too ardent in execution, and too impatient of
difficulties. but it is a still greater evil to me that i am
self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life i ran wild on a
common, and read nothing but our uncle thomas’s books of voyages. at
that age i became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive
its most important benefits from such a conviction, that i perceived the
necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my
native country. now i am twenty-eight, and am in reality more illiterate
than many school-boys of fifteen. it is true that i have thought more,
and that my day dreams are more extended and magnificent; but they want
(as the painters call it) _keeping_; and i greatly need a friend who
would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection
enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind.

well, these are useless complaints; i shall certainly find no friend on
the wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchants and seamen.
yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in
these rugged bosoms. my lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful
courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory. he is an
englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
humanity. i first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel:
finding that he was unemployed in this city, i easily engaged him to
assist in my enterprise.

the master is a person of an excellent disposition, and is remarkable in
the ship for his gentleness, and the mildness of his discipline. he is,
indeed, of so amiable a nature, that he will not hunt (a favourite, and
almost the only amusement here), because he cannot endure to spill
blood. he is, moreover, heroically generous. some years ago he loved a
young russian lady, of moderate fortune; and having amassed a
considerable sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the
match. he saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she
was bathed in tears, and, throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to
spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that
he was poor, and that her father would never consent to the union. my
generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the
name of her lover instantly abandoned his pursuit. he had already bought
a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of
his life; but he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the
remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited
the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. but
the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my
friend; who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country,
nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married
according to her inclinations. “what a noble fellow!” you will exclaim.
he is so; but then he has passed all his life on board a vessel, and has
scarcely an idea beyond the rope and the shroud.

but do not suppose that, because i complain a little, or because i can
conceive a consolation for my toils which i may never know, that i am
wavering in my resolutions. those are as fixed as fate; and my voyage is
only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. the
winter has been dreadfully severe; but the spring promises well, and it
is considered as a remarkably early season; so that, perhaps, i may sail
sooner than i expected. i shall do nothing rashly; you know me
sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the
safety of others is committed to my care.

i cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my
undertaking. it is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the
trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which i am
preparing to depart. i am going to unexplored regions, to “the land of
mist and snow;” but i shall kill no albatross, therefore do not be
alarmed for my safety.

shall i meet you again, after having traversed immense seas, and
returned by the most southern cape of africa or america? i dare not
expect such success, yet i cannot bear to look on the reverse of the
picture. continue to write to me by every opportunity: i may receive
your letters (though the chance is very doubtful) on some occasions when
i need them most to support my spirits. i love you very tenderly.
remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again.

your affectionate brother,

robert walton.




letter iii.


_to mrs._ saville, _england_.

july 7th, 17--.

my dear sister,

i write a few lines in haste, to say that i am safe, and well advanced
on my voyage. this letter will reach england by a merchant-man now on
its homeward voyage from archangel; more fortunate than i, who may not
see my native land, perhaps, for many years. i am, however, in good
spirits: my men are bold, and apparently firm of purpose; nor do the
floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers
of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. we
have already reached a very high latitude; but it is the height of
summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales,
which blow us speedily towards those shores which i so ardently desire
to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which i had not
expected.

no incidents have hitherto befallen us, that would make a figure in a
letter. one or two stiff gales, and the breaking of a mast, are
accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record; and
i shall be well content, if nothing worse happen to us during our
voyage.

adieu, my dear margaret. be assured, that for my own sake, as well as
your’s, i will not rashly encounter danger. i will be cool, persevering,
and prudent.

remember me to all my english friends.

most affectionately yours,

r. w.




letter iv.


_to mrs._ saville, _england_.

august 5th, 17--.

so strange an accident has happened to us, that i cannot forbear
recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before
these papers can come into your possession.

last monday (july 31st), we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea room in which she
floated. our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were
compassed round by a very thick fog. we accordingly lay to, hoping that
some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.

about two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out in
every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have
no end. some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow
watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted
our attention, and diverted our solicitude from our own situation. we
perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on
towards the north, at the distance of half a mile: a being which had the
shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge,
and guided the dogs. we watched the rapid progress of the traveller
with our telescopes, until he was lost among the distant inequalities of
the ice.

this appearance excited our unqualified wonder. we were, as we believed,
many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote
that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. shut in,
however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had
observed with the greatest attention.

about two hours after this occurrence, we heard the ground sea; and
before night the ice broke, and freed our ship. we, however, lay to
until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose
masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. i profited of
this time to rest for a few hours.

in the morning, however, as soon as it was light, i went upon deck, and
found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently talking
to some one in the sea. it was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had seen
before, which had drifted towards us in the night, on a large fragment
of ice. only one dog remained alive; but there was a human being within
it, whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. he was not, as
the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some
undiscovered island, but an european. when i appeared on deck, the
master said, “here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish
on the open sea.”

on perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in english, although with a
foreign accent. “before i come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you
have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?”

you may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to
me from a man on the brink of destruction, and to whom i should have
supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not
have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. i
replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the
northern pole.

upon hearing this he appeared satisfied, and consented to come on board.
good god! margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for his
safety, your surprise would have been boundless. his limbs were nearly
frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering. i
never saw a man in so wretched a condition. we attempted to carry him
into the cabin; but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air, he fainted.
we accordingly brought him back to the deck, and restored him to
animation by rubbing him with brandy, and forcing him to swallow a small
quantity. as soon as he shewed signs of life, we wrapped him up in
blankets, and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen-stove. by slow
degrees he recovered, and ate a little soup, which restored him
wonderfully.

two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak; and i often
feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. when he
had in some measure recovered, i removed him to my own cabin, and
attended on him as much as my duty would permit. i never saw a more
interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of wildness,
and even madness; but there are moments when, if any one performs an act
of kindness towards him, or does him any the most trifling service, his
whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence
and sweetness that i never saw equalled. but he is generally melancholy
and despairing; and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of
the weight of woes that oppresses him.

when my guest was a little recovered, i had great trouble to keep off
the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but i would not
allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body
and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose. once,
however, the lieutenant asked, why he had come so far upon the ice in so
strange a vehicle?

his countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom; and he
replied, “to seek one who fled from me.”

“and did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”

“yes.”

“then i fancy we have seen him; for, the day before we picked you up, we
saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.”

this aroused the stranger’s attention; and he asked a multitude of
questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had
pursued. soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, “i have,
doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people;
but you are too considerate to make inquiries.”

“certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to
trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.”

“and yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you have
benevolently restored me to life.”

soon after this he inquired, if i thought that the breaking up of the
ice had destroyed the other sledge? i replied, that i could not answer
with any degree of certainty; for the ice had not broken until near
midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety
before that time; but of this i could not judge.

from this time the stranger seemed very eager to be upon deck, to watch
for the sledge which had before appeared; but i have persuaded him to
remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of
the atmosphere. but i have promised that some one should watch for him,
and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight.

such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the
present day. the stranger has gradually improved in health, but is very
silent, and appears uneasy when any one except myself enters his cabin.
yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle, that the sailors are all
interested in him, although they have had very little communication with
him. for my own part, i begin to love him as a brother; and his constant
and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion. he must have been
a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so
attractive and amiable.

i said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that i should find no
friend on the wide ocean; yet i have found a man who, before his spirit
had been broken by misery, i should have been happy to have possessed as
the brother of my heart.

i shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, should
i have any fresh incidents to record.

       *       *       *       *       *

august 13th, 17--.

my affection for my guest increases every day. he excites at once my
admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. how can i see so noble
a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief?
he is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated; and when he
speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they
flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.

he is now much recovered from his illness, and is continually on the
deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. yet,
although unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery, but
that he interests himself deeply in the employments of others. he has
asked me many questions concerning my design; and i have related my
little history frankly to him. he appeared pleased with the confidence,
and suggested several alterations in my plan, which i shall find
exceedingly useful. there is no pedantry in his manner; but all he does
appears to spring solely from the interest he instinctively takes in the
welfare of those who surround him. he is often overcome by gloom, and
then he sits by himself, and tries to overcome all that is sullen or
unsocial in his humour. these paroxysms pass from him like a cloud from
before the sun, though his dejection never leaves him. i have
endeavoured to win his confidence; and i trust that i have succeeded.
one day i mentioned to him the desire i had always felt of finding a
friend who might sympathize with me, and direct me by his counsel. i
said, i did not belong to that class of men who are offended by advice.
“i am self-educated, and perhaps i hardly rely sufficiently upon my own
powers. i wish therefore that my companion should be wiser and more
experienced than myself, to confirm and support me; nor have i believed
it impossible to find a true friend.”

“i agree with you,” replied the stranger, “in believing that friendship
is not only a desirable, but a possible acquisition. i once had a
friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore,
to judge respecting friendship. you have hope, and the world before you,
and have no cause for despair. but i----i have lost every thing, and
cannot begin life anew.”

as he said this, his countenance became expressive of a calm settled
grief, that touched me to the heart. but he was silent, and presently
retired to his cabin.

even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does
the beauties of nature. the starry sky, the sea, and every sight
afforded by these wonderful regions, seems still to have the power of
elevating his soul from earth. such a man has a double existence: he may
suffer misery, and be overwhelmed by disappointments; yet when he has
retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit, that has a
halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.

will you laugh at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine
wanderer? if you do, you must have certainly lost that simplicity which
was once your characteristic charm. yet, if you will, smile at the
warmth of my expressions, while i find every day new causes for
repeating them.

       *       *       *       *       *

august 19th, 17--.

yesterday the stranger said to me, “you may easily perceive, captain
walton, that i have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. i had
determined, once, that the memory of these evils should die with me; but
you have won me to alter my determination. you seek for knowledge and
wisdom, as i once did; and i ardently hope that the gratification of
your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. i do
not know that the relation of my misfortunes will be useful to you, yet,
if you are inclined, listen to my tale. i believe that the strange
incidents connected with it will afford a view of nature, which may
enlarge your faculties and understanding. you will hear of powers and
occurrences, such as you have been accustomed to believe impossible: but
i do not doubt that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of
the truth of the events of which it is composed.”

you may easily conceive that i was much gratified by the offered
communication; yet i could not endure that he should renew his grief by
a recital of his misfortunes. i felt the greatest eagerness to hear the
promised narrative, partly from curiosity, and partly from a strong
desire to ameliorate his fate, if it were in my power. i expressed these
feelings in my answer.

“i thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is useless; my
fate is nearly fulfilled. i wait but for one event, and then i shall
repose in peace. i understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving
that i wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if
thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny: listen
to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.”

he then told me, that he would commence his narrative the next day when
i should be at leisure. this promise drew from me the warmest thanks. i
have resolved every night, when i am not engaged, to record, as nearly
as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day. if i
should be engaged, i will at least make notes. this manuscript will
doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure: but to me, who know him, and
who hear it from his own lips, with what interest and sympathy shall i
read it in some future day!




frankenstein;

or,

the modern prometheus.




chapter i.


i am by birth a genevese; and my family is one of the most distinguished
of that republic. my ancestors had been for many years counsellors and
syndics; and my father had filled several public situations with honour
and reputation. he was respected by all who knew him for his integrity
and indefatigable attention to public business. he passed his younger
days perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; and it was not
until the decline of life that he thought of marrying, and bestowing on
the state sons who might carry his virtues and his name down to
posterity.

as the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot
refrain from relating them. one of his most intimate friends was a
merchant, who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous
mischances, into poverty. this man, whose name was beaufort, was of a
proud and unbending disposition, and could not bear to live in poverty
and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been
distinguished for his rank and magnificence. having paid his debts,
therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter
to the town of lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. my
father loved beaufort with the truest friendship, and was deeply grieved
by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. he grieved also for
the loss of his society, and resolved to seek him out and endeavour to
persuade him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance.

beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself; and it was ten
months before my father discovered his abode. overjoyed at this
discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean
street, near the reuss. but when he entered, misery and despair alone
welcomed him. beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the
wreck of his fortunes; but it was sufficient to provide him with
sustenance for some months, and in the mean time he hoped to procure
some respectable employment in a merchant’s house. the interval was
consequently spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and
rankling, when he had leisure for reflection; and at length it took so
fast hold of his mind, that at the end of three months he lay on a bed
of sickness, incapable of any exertion.

his daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness; but she saw with
despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there
was no other prospect of support. but caroline beaufort possessed a mind
of an uncommon mould; and her courage rose to support her in her
adversity. she procured plain work; she plaited straw; and by various
means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.

several months passed in this manner. her father grew worse; her time
was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence
decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving
her an orphan and a beggar. this last blow overcame her; and she knelt
by beaufort’s coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered the
chamber. he came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who
committed herself to his care, and after the interment of his friend he
conducted her to geneva, and placed her under the protection of a
relation. two years after this event caroline became his wife.

when my father became a husband and a parent, he found his time so
occupied by the duties of his new situation, that he relinquished many
of his public employments, and devoted himself to the education of his
children. of these i was the eldest, and the destined successor to all
his labours and utility. no creature could have more tender parents than
mine. my improvement and health were their constant care, especially as
i remained for several years their only child. but before i continue my
narrative, i must record an incident which took place when i was four
years of age.

my father had a sister, whom he tenderly loved, and who had married
early in life an italian gentleman. soon after her marriage, she had
accompanied her husband into her native country, and for some years my
father had very little communication with her. about the time i
mentioned she died; and a few months afterwards he received a letter
from her husband, acquainting him with his intention of marrying an
italian lady, and requesting my father to take charge of the infant
elizabeth, the only child of his deceased sister. “it is my wish,” he
said, “that you should consider her as your own daughter, and educate
her thus. her mother’s fortune is secured to her, the documents of which
i will commit to your keeping. reflect upon this proposition; and decide
whether you would prefer educating your niece yourself to her being
brought up by a stepmother.”

my father did not hestitate, and immediately went to italy, that he
might accompany the little elizabeth to her future home. i have often
heard my mother say, that she was at that time the most beautiful child
she had ever seen, and shewed signs even then of a gentle and
affectionate disposition. these indications, and a desire to bind as
closely as possible the ties of domestic love, determined my mother to
consider elizabeth as my future wife; a design which she never found
reason to repent.

from this time elizabeth lavenza became my playfellow, and, as we grew
older, my friend. she was docile and good tempered, yet gay and playful
as a summer insect. although she was lively and animated, her feelings
were strong and deep, and her disposition uncommonly affectionate. no
one could better enjoy liberty, yet no one could submit with more grace
than she did to constraint and caprice. her imagination was luxuriant,
yet her capability of application was great. her person was the image of
her mind; her hazel eyes, although as lively as a bird’s, possessed an
attractive softness. her figure was light and airy; and, though capable
of enduring great fatigue, she appeared the most fragile creature in the
world. while i admired her understanding and fancy, i loved to tend on
her, as i should on a favourite animal; and i never saw so much grace
both of person and mind united to so little pretension.

every one adored elizabeth. if the servants had any request to make, it
was always through her intercession. we were strangers to any species of
disunion and dispute; for although there was a great dissimilitude in
our characters, there was an harmony in that very dissimilitude. i was
more calm and philosophical than my companion; yet my temper was not so
yielding. my application was of longer endurance; but it was not so
severe whilst it endured. i delighted in investigating the facts
relative to the actual world; she busied herself in following the aërial
creations of the poets. the world was to me a secret, which i desired to
discover; to her it was a vacancy, which she sought to people with
imaginations of her own.

my brothers were considerably younger than myself; but i had a friend
in one of my schoolfellows, who compensated for this deficiency. henry
clerval was the son of a merchant of geneva, an intimate friend of my
father. he was a boy of singular talent and fancy. i remember, when he
was nine years old, he wrote a fairy tale, which was the delight and
amazement of all his companions. his favourite study consisted in books
of chivalry and romance; and when very young, i can remember, that we
used to act plays composed by him out of these favourite books, the
principal characters of which were orlando, robin hood, amadis, and st.
george.

no youth could have passed more happily than mine. my parents were
indulgent, and my companions amiable. our studies were never forced; and
by some means we always had an end placed in view, which excited us to
ardour in the prosecution of them. it was by this method, and not by
emulation, that we were urged to application. elizabeth was not incited
to apply herself to drawing, that her companions might not outstrip her;
but through the desire of pleasing her aunt, by the representation of
some favourite scene done by her own hand. we learned latin and english,
that we might read the writings in those languages; and so far from
study being made odious to us through punishment, we loved application,
and our amusements would have been the labours of other children.
perhaps we did not read so many books, or learn languages so quickly, as
those who are disciplined according to the ordinary methods; but what
we learned was impressed the more deeply on our memories.

in this description of our domestic circle i include henry clerval; for
he was constantly with us. he went to school with me, and generally
passed the afternoon at our house; for being an only child, and
destitute of companions at home, his father was well pleased that he
should find associates at our house; and we were never completely happy
when clerval was absent.

i feel pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before
misfortune had tainted my mind, and changed its bright visions of
extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. but,
in drawing the picture of my early days, i must not omit to record those
events which led, by insensible steps to my after tale of misery: for
when i would account to myself for the birth of that passion, which
afterwards ruled my destiny, i find it arise, like a mountain river,
from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as it
proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away
all my hopes and joys.

natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; i desire
therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my
predilection for that science. when i was thirteen years of age, we all
went on a party of pleasure to the baths near thonon: the inclemency of
the weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. in this
house i chanced to find a volume of the works of cornelius agrippa. i
opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate, and
the wonderful facts which he relates, soon changed this feeling into
enthusiasm. a new light seemed to dawn upon my mind; and, bounding with
joy, i communicated my discovery to my father. i cannot help remarking
here the many opportunities instructors possess of directing the
attention of their pupils to useful knowledge, which they utterly
neglect. my father looked carelessly at the title-page of my book, and
said, “ah! cornelius agrippa! my dear victor, do not waste your time
upon this; it is sad trash.”

if, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains, to explain to
me, that the principles of agrippa had been entirely exploded, and that
a modern system of science had been introduced, which possessed much
greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were
chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical; under
such circumstances, i should certainly have thrown agrippa aside, and,
with my imagination warmed as it was, should probably have applied
myself to the more rational theory of chemistry which has resulted from
modern discoveries. it is even possible, that the train of my ideas
would never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. but the
cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me
that he was acquainted with its contents; and i continued to read with
the greatest avidity.

when i returned home, my first care was to procure the whole works of
this author, and afterwards of paracelsus and albertus magnus. i read
and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they
appeared to me treasures known to few beside myself; and although i
often wished to communicate these secret stores of knowledge to my
father, yet his indefinite censure of my favourite agrippa always
withheld me. i disclosed my discoveries to elizabeth, therefore, under a
promise of strict secrecy; but she did not interest herself in the
subject, and i was left by her to pursue my studies alone.

it may appear very strange, that a disciple of albertus magnus should
arise in the eighteenth century; but our family was not scientifical,
and i had not attended any of the lectures given at the schools of
geneva. my dreams were therefore undisturbed by reality; and i entered
with the greatest diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone
and the elixir of life. but the latter obtained my most undivided
attention: wealth was an inferior object; but what glory would attend
the discovery, if i could banish disease from the human frame, and
render man invulnerable to any but a violent death!

nor were these my only visions. the raising of ghosts or devils was a
promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of
which i most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always
unsuccessful, i attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and
mistake, than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors.

the natural phænomena that take place every day before our eyes did not
escape my examinations. distillation, and the wonderful effects of
steam, processes of which my favourite authors were utterly ignorant,
excited my astonishment; but my utmost wonder was engaged by some
experiments on an air-pump, which i saw employed by a gentleman whom we
were in the habit of visiting.

the ignorance of the early philosophers on these and several other
points served to decrease their credit with me: but i could not entirely
throw them aside, before some other system should occupy their place in
my mind.

when i was about fifteen years old, we had retired to our house near
belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunder-storm. it
advanced from behind the mountains of jura; and the thunder burst at
once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. i
remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity
and delight. as i stood at the door, on a sudden i beheld a stream of
fire issue from an old and beautiful oak, which stood about twenty yards
from our house; and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had
disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. when we visited
it the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular manner.
it was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin
ribbands of wood. i never beheld any thing so utterly destroyed.

the catastrophe of this tree excited my extreme astonishment; and i
eagerly inquired of my father the nature and origin of thunder and
lightning. he replied, “electricity;” describing at the same time the
various effects of that power. he constructed a small electrical
machine, and exhibited a few experiments; he made also a kite, with a
wire and string, which drew down that fluid from the clouds.

this last stroke completed the overthrow of cornelius agrippa, albertus
magnus, and paracelsus, who had so long reigned the lords of my
imagination. but by some fatality i did not feel inclined to commence
the study of any modern system; and this disinclination was influenced
by the following circumstance.

my father expressed a wish that i should attend a course of lectures
upon natural philosophy, to which i cheerfully consented. some accident
prevented my attending these lectures until the course was nearly
finished. the lecture, being therefore one of the last, was entirely
incomprehensible to me. the professor discoursed with the greatest
fluency of potassium and boron, of sulphates and oxyds, terms to which i
could affix no idea; and i became disgusted with the science of natural
philosophy, although i still read pliny and buffon with delight,
authors, in my estimation, of nearly equal interest and utility.

my occupations at this age were principally the mathematics, and most of
the branches of study appertaining to that science. i was busily
employed in learning languages; latin was already familiar to me, and i
began to read some of the easiest greek authors without the help of a
lexicon. i also perfectly understood english and german. this is the
list of my accomplishments at the age of seventeen; and you may conceive
that my hours were fully employed in acquiring and maintaining a
knowledge of this various literature.

another task also devolved upon me, when i became the instructor of my
brothers. ernest was six years younger than myself, and was my principal
pupil. he had been afflicted with ill health from his infancy, through
which elizabeth and i had been his constant nurses: his disposition was
gentle, but he was incapable of any severe application. william, the
youngest of our family, was yet an infant, and the most beautiful little
fellow in the world; his lively blue eyes, dimpled cheeks, and endearing
manners, inspired the tenderest affection.

such was our domestic circle, from which care and pain seemed for ever
banished. my father directed our studies, and my mother partook of our
enjoyments. neither of us possessed the slightest pre-eminence over the
other; the voice of command was never heard amongst us; but mutual
affection engaged us all to comply with and obey the slightest desire of
each other.




chapter ii.


when i had attained the age of seventeen, my parents resolved that i
should become a student at the university of ingolstadt. i had hitherto
attended the schools of geneva; but my father thought it necessary, for
the completion of my education, that i should be made acquainted with
other customs than those of my native country. my departure was
therefore fixed at an early date; but, before the day resolved upon
could arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred--an omen, as it
were, of my future misery.

elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; but her illness was not severe,
and she quickly recovered. during her confinement, many arguments had
been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. she
had, at first, yielded to our entreaties; but when she heard that her
favourite was recovering, she could no longer debar herself from her
society, and entered her chamber long before the danger of infection was
past. the consequences of this imprudence were fatal. on the third day
my mother sickened; her fever was very malignant, and the looks of her
attendants prognosticated the worst event. on her death-bed the
fortitude and benignity of this admirable woman did not desert her. she
joined the hands of elizabeth and myself: “my children,” she said, “my
firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect of your
union. this expectation will now be the consolation of your father.
elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to your younger cousins.
alas! i regret that i am taken from you; and, happy and beloved as i
have been, is it not hard to quit you all? but these are not thoughts
befitting me; i will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death, and
will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.”

she died calmly; and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
i need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by
that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul,
and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. it is so long
before the mind can persuade itself that she, whom we saw every day, and
whose very existence appeared a part of our own, can have departed for
ever--that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished,
and the sound of a voice so familiar, and dear to the ear, can be
hushed, never more to be heard. these are the reflections of the first
days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then
the actual bitterness of grief commences. yet from whom has not that
rude hand rent away some dear connexion; and why should i describe a
sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? the time at length arrives,
when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that
plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not
banished. my mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to
perform; we must continue our course with the rest, and learn to think
ourselves fortunate, whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.

my journey to ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was
now again determined upon. i obtained from my father a respite of some
weeks. this period was spent sadly; my mother’s death, and my speedy
departure, depressed our spirits; but elizabeth endeavoured to renew the
spirit of cheerfulness in our little society. since the death of her
aunt, her mind had acquired new firmness and vigour. she determined to
fulfil her duties with the greatest exactness; and she felt that that
most imperious duty, of rendering her uncle and cousins happy, had
devolved upon her. she consoled me, amused her uncle, instructed my
brothers; and i never beheld her so enchanting as at this time, when she
was continually endeavouring to contribute to the happiness of others,
entirely forgetful of herself.

the day of my departure at length arrived. i had taken leave of all my
friends, excepting clerval, who spent the last evening with us. he
bitterly lamented that he was unable to accompany me: but his father
could not be persuaded to part with him, intending that he should become
a partner with him in business, in compliance with his favourite theory,
that learning was superfluous in the commerce of ordinary life. henry
had a refined mind; he had no desire to be idle, and was well pleased to
become his father’s partner, but he believed that a man might be a very
good trader, and yet possess a cultivated understanding.

we sat late, listening to his complaints, and making many little
arrangements for the future. the next morning early i departed. tears
gushed from the eyes of elizabeth; they proceeded partly from sorrow at
my departure, and partly because she reflected that the same journey was
to have taken place three months before, when a mother’s blessing would
have accompanied me.

i threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away, and indulged
in the most melancholy reflections. i, who had ever been surrounded by
amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow
mutual pleasure, i was now alone. in the university, whither i was
going, i must form my own friends, and be my own protector. my life had
hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic; and this had given me
invincible repugnance to new countenances. i loved my brothers,
elizabeth, and clerval: these were “old familiar faces;” but i believed
myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers. such were my
reflections as i commenced my journey; but as i proceeded, my spirits
and hopes rose. i ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. i had
often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up
in one place, and had longed to enter the world, and take my station
among other human beings. now my desires were complied with, and it
would, indeed, have been folly to repent.

i had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my
journey to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. at length the high
white steeple of the town met my eyes. i alighted, and was conducted to
my solitary apartment, to spend the evening as i pleased.

the next morning i delivered my letters of introduction, and paid a
visit to some of the principal professors, and among others to m.
krempe, professor of natural philosophy. he received me with politeness,
and asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different
branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. i mentioned, it
is true, with fear and trembling, the only authors i had ever read upon
those subjects. the professor stared: “have you,” he said, “really spent
your time in studying such nonsense?”

i replied in the affirmative. “every minute,” continued m. krempe with
warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly
and entirely lost. you have burdened your memory with exploded systems,
and useless names. good god! in what desert land have you lived, where
no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies, which you have
so greedily imbibed, are a thousand years old, and as musty as they are
ancient? i little expected in this enlightened and scientific age to
find a disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus. my dear sir, you must
begin your studies entirely anew.”

so saying, he stept aside, and wrote down a list of several books
treating of natural philosophy, which he desired me to procure, and
dismissed me, after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural
philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, a
fellow-professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that
he missed.

i returned home, not disappointed, for i had long considered those
authors useless whom the professor had so strongly reprobated; but i did
not feel much inclined to study the books which i procured at his
recommendation. m. krempe was a little squat man, with a gruff voice and
repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in
favour of his doctrine. besides, i had a contempt for the uses of modern
natural philosophy. it was very different, when the masters of the
science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were
grand: but now the scene was changed. the ambition of the inquirer
seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my
interest in science was chiefly founded. i was required to exchange
chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.

such were my reflections during the first two or three days spent almost
in solitude. but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the
information which m. krempe had given me concerning the lectures. and
although i could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow
deliver sentences out of a pulpit, i recollected what he had said of m.
waldman, whom i had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.

partly from curiosity, and partly from idleness, i went into the
lecturing room, which m. waldman entered shortly after. this professor
was very unlike his colleague. he appeared about fifty years of age, but
with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few gray hairs
covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly
black. his person was short, but remarkably erect; and his voice the
sweetest i had ever heard. he began his lecture by a recapitulation of
the history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different
men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most
distinguished discoverers. he then took a cursory view of the present
state of the science, and explained many of its elementary terms. after
having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric
upon modern chemistry, the terms of which i shall never forget:--

“the ancient teachers of this science,” said he, “promised
impossibilities, and performed nothing. the modern masters promise very
little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted, and that the elixir
of life is a chimera. but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made
to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pour over the microscope or
crucible, have indeed performed miracles. they penetrate into the
recesses of nature, and shew how she works in her hiding places. they
ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates,
and the nature of the air we breathe. they have acquired new and almost
unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the
earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.”

i departed highly pleased with the professor and his lecture, and paid
him a visit the same evening. his manners in private were even more mild
and attractive than in public; for there was a certain dignity in his
mien during his lecture, which in his own house was replaced by the
greatest affability and kindness. he heard with attention my little
narration concerning my studies, and smiled at the names of cornelius
agrippa, and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had
exhibited. he said, that “these were men to whose indefatigable zeal
modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
knowledge. they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names,
and arrange in connected classifications, the facts which they in a
great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. the labours
of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in
ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” i listened to his
statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation;
and then added, that his lecture had removed my prejudices against
modern chemists; and i, at the same time, requested his advice
concerning the books i ought to procure.

“i am happy,” said m. waldman, “to have gained a disciple; and if your
application equals your ability, i have no doubt of your success.
chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest
improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that i
have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time i have not
neglected the other branches of science. a man would make but a very
sorry chemist, if he attended to that department of human knowledge
alone. if your wish is to become really a man of science, and not merely
a petty experimentalist, i should advise you to apply to every branch of
natural philosophy, including mathematics.”

he then took me into his laboratory, and explained to me the uses of
his various machines; instructing me as to what i ought to procure, and
promising me the use of his own, when i should have advanced far enough
in the science not to derange their mechanism. he also gave me the list
of books which i had requested; and i took my leave.

thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.




chapter iii.


from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. i attended the
lectures, and cultivated the acquaintance, of the men of science of the
university; and i found even in m. krempe a great deal of sound sense
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy
and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. in m. waldman i
found a true friend. his gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism; and
his instructions were given with an air of frankness and good nature,
that banished every idea of pedantry. it was, perhaps, the amiable
character of this man that inclined me more to that branch of natural
philosophy which he professed, than an intrinsic love for the science
itself. but this state of mind had place only in the first steps towards
knowledge: the more fully i entered into the science, the more
exclusively i pursued it for its own sake. that application, which at
first had been a matter of duty and resolution, now became so ardent and
eager, that the stars often disappeared in the light of morning whilst
i was yet engaged in my laboratory.

as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that i improved
rapidly. my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students; and my
proficiency, that of the masters. professor krempe often asked me, with
a sly smile, how cornelius agrippa went on? whilst m. waldman expressed
the most heart-felt exultation in my progress. two years passed in this
manner, during which i paid no visit to geneva, but was engaged, heart
and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries, which i hoped to make.
none but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements
of science. in other studies you go as far as others have gone before
you, and there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit
there is continual food for discovery and wonder. a mind of moderate
capacity, which closely pursues one study, must infallibly arrive at
great proficiency in that study; and i, who continually sought the
attainment of one object of pursuit, and was solely wrapt up in this,
improved so rapidly, that, at the end of two years, i made some
discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which
procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. when i had
arrived at this point, and had become as well acquainted with the theory
and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of
the professors at ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer
conducive to my improvements, i thought of returning to my friends and
my native town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay.

one of the phænonema which had peculiarly attracted my attention was the
structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life.
whence, i often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? it was
a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a mystery;
yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming acquainted,
if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. i revolved
these circumstances in my mind, and determined thenceforth to apply
myself more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy which
relate to physiology. unless i had been animated by an almost
supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been
irksome, and almost intolerable. to examine the causes of life, we must
first have recourse to death. i became acquainted with the science of
anatomy: but this was not sufficient; i must also observe the natural
decay and corruption of the human body. in my education my father had
taken the greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed with no
supernatural horrors. i do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale
of superstition, or to have feared the apparition of a spirit. darkness
had no effect upon my fancy; and a church-yard was to me merely the
receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of
beauty and strength, had become food for the worm. now i was led to
examine the cause and progress of this decay, and forced to spend days
and nights in vaults and charnel houses. my attention was fixed upon
every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the human
feelings. i saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted; i
beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; i
saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. i paused,
examining and analysing all the minutiæ of causation, as exemplified in
the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst
of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me--a light so brilliant
and wondrous, yet so simple, that while i became dizzy with the
immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, i was surprised that
among so many men of genius, who had directed their inquiries towards
the same science, that i alone should be reserved to discover so
astonishing a secret.

remember, i am not recording the vision of a madman. the sun does not
more certainly shine in the heavens, than that which i now affirm is
true. some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
discovery were distinct and probable. after days and nights of
incredible labour and fatigue, i succeeded in discovering the cause of
generation and life; nay, more, i became myself capable of bestowing
animation upon lifeless matter.

the astonishment which i had at first experienced on this discovery soon
gave place to delight and rapture. after so much time spent in painful
labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires, was the most
gratifying consummation of my toils. but this discovery was so great
and overwhelming, that all the steps by which i had been progressively
led to it were obliterated, and i beheld only the result. what had been
the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world,
was now within my grasp. not that, like a magic scene, it all opened
upon me at once: the information i had obtained was of a nature rather
to direct my endeavours so soon as i should point them towards the
object of my search, than to exhibit that object already accomplished. i
was like the arabian who had been buried with the dead, and found a
passage to life aided only by one glimmering, and seemingly ineffectual
light.

i see by your eagerness, and the wonder and hope which your eyes
express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
which i am acquainted; that cannot be: listen patiently until the end of
my story, and you will easily perceive why i am reserved upon that
subject. i will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as i then was, to
your destruction and infallible misery. learn from me, if not by my
precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of
knowledge, and how much happier that man is who believes his native town
to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature
will allow.

when i found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, i hesitated
a long time concerning the manner in which i should employ it. although
i possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame
for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles,
and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and labour.
i doubted at first whether i should attempt the creation of a being like
myself or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was too much
exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give
life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man. the materials at
present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an
undertaking; but i doubted not that i should ultimately succeed. i
prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my operations might be
incessantly baffled, and at last my work be imperfect: yet, when i
considered the improvement which every day takes place in science and
mechanics, i was encouraged to hope my present attempts would at least
lay the foundations of future success. nor could i consider the
magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its
impracticability. it was with these feelings that i began the creation
of a human being. as the minuteness of the parts formed a great
hindrance to my speed, i resolved, contrary to my first intention, to
make the being of a gigantic stature; that is to say, about eight feet
in height, and proportionably large. after having formed this
determination, and having spent some months in successfully collecting
and arranging my materials, i began.

no one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like
a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. life and death appeared
to me ideal bounds, which i should first break through, and pour a
torrent of light into our dark world. a new species would bless me as
its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their
being to me. no father could claim the gratitude of his child so
completely as i should deserve their’s. pursuing these reflections, i
thought, that if i could bestow animation upon lifeless matter, i might
in process of time (although i now found it impossible) renew life where
death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.

these thoughts supported my spirits, while i pursued my undertaking with
unremitting ardour. my cheek had grown pale with study, and my person
had become emaciated with confinement. sometimes, on the very brink of
certainty, i failed; yet still i clung to the hope which the next day or
the next hour might realize. one secret which i alone possessed was the
hope to which i had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight
labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, i pursued
nature to her hiding places. who shall conceive the horrors of my secret
toil, as i dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave, or tortured
the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? my limbs now tremble,
and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but then a resistless, and almost
frantic impulse, urged me forward; i seemed to have lost all soul or
sensation but for this one pursuit. it was indeed but a passing trance,
that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural
stimulus ceasing to operate, i had returned to my old habits. i
collected bones from charnel houses; and disturbed, with profane
fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame. in a solitary
chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, and separated from all
the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, i kept my workshop of
filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in
attending to the details of my employment. the dissecting room and the
slaughter-house furnished many of my materials; and often did my human
nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by
an eagerness which perpetually increased, i brought my work near to a
conclusion.

the summer months passed while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
one pursuit. it was a most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow
a more plentiful harvest, or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage:
but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. and the same
feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to
forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom i had not
seen for so long a time. i knew my silence disquieted them; and i well
remembered the words of my father: “i know that while you are pleased
with yourself, you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear
regularly from you. you must pardon me, if i regard any interruption in
your correspondence as a proof that your other duties are equally
neglected.”

i knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings; but i could
not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. i wished, as it were,
to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the
great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be
completed.

i then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect
to vice, or faultiness on my part; but i am now convinced that he was
justified in conceiving that i should not be altogether free from blame.
a human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful
mind, and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his
tranquillity. i do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an
exception to this rule. if the study to which you apply yourself has a
tendency to weaken your affections, and to destroy your taste for those
simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is
certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind. if
this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit
whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic
affections, greece had not been enslaved; cæsar would have spared his
country; america would have been discovered more gradually; and the
empires of mexico and peru had not been destroyed.

but i forget that i am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
tale; and your looks remind me to proceed.

my father made no reproach in his letters; and only took notice of my
silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
winter, spring, and summer, passed away during my labours; but i did not
watch the blossom or the expanding leaves--sights which before always
yielded me supreme delight, so deeply was i engrossed in my occupation.
the leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a
close; and now every day shewed me more plainly how well i had
succeeded. but my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and i appeared
rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
unwholesome trade, than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
every night i was oppressed by a slow fever, and i became nervous to a
most painful degree; a disease that i regretted the more because i had
hitherto enjoyed most excellent health, and had always boasted of the
firmness of my nerves. but i believed that exercise and amusement would
soon drive away such symptoms; and i promised myself both of these, when
my creation should be complete.




chapter iv.


it was on a dreary night of november, that i beheld the accomplishment
of my toils. with an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, i collected
the instruments of life around me, that i might infuse a spark of being
into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. it was already one in the
morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was
nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, i
saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a
convulsive motion agitated its limbs.

how can i describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the
wretch whom with such infinite pains and care i had endeavoured to form?
his limbs were in proportion, and i had selected his features as
beautiful. beautiful!--great god! his yellow skin scarcely covered the
work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous black,
and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these luxuriances only
formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, that seemed almost
of the same colour as the dun white sockets in which they were set, his
shrivelled complexion, and straight black lips.

the different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of
human nature. i had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. for this i had deprived
myself of rest and health. i had desired it with an ardour that far
exceeded moderation; but now that i had finished, the beauty of the
dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart.
unable to endure the aspect of the being i had created, i rushed out of
the room, and continued a long time traversing my bed-chamber, unable
to compose my mind to sleep. at length lassitude succeeded to the
tumult i had before endured; and i threw myself on the bed in my
clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness. but it was
in vain: i slept indeed, but i was disturbed by the wildest dreams. i
thought i saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in the streets
of ingolstadt. delighted and surprised, i embraced her; but as i
imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of
death; her features appeared to change, and i thought that i held the
corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and i
saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. i started from
my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth
chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and yellow
light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window-shutters, i
beheld the wretch--the miserable monster whom i had created. he held up
the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were
fixed on me. his jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds,
while a grin wrinkled his cheeks. he might have spoken, but i did not
hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but i escaped,
and rushed down stairs. i took refuge in the court-yard belonging to the
house which i inhabited; where i remained during the rest of the night,
walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively,
catching and fearing each sound as if it were to announce the approach
of the demoniacal corpse to which i had so miserably given life.

oh! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. a mummy
again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. i
had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then; but when those
muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing
such as even dante could not have conceived.

i passed the night wretchedly. sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
hardly, that i felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, i nearly
sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. mingled with
this horror, i felt the bitterness of disappointment: dreams that had
been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space, were now become a
hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!

morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned, and discovered to my
sleepless and aching eyes the church of ingolstadt, its white steeple
and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. the porter opened the gates
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and i issued into the
streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if i sought to avoid the
wretch whom i feared every turning of the street would present to my
view. i did not dare return to the apartment which i inhabited, but felt
impelled to hurry on, although wetted by the rain, which poured from a
black and comfortless sky.

i continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring, by
bodily exercise, to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. i
traversed the streets, without any clear conception of where i was, or
what i was doing. my heart palpitated in the sickness of fear; and i
hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:

    like one who, on a lonely road,
      doth walk in fear and dread,
    and, having once turn’d round, walks on,
      and turns no more his head;
    because he knows a frightful fiend
      doth close behind him tread.

continuing thus, i came at length opposite to the inn at which the
various diligences and carriages usually stopped. here i paused, i knew
not why; but i remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that
was coming towards me from the other end of the street. as it drew
nearer, i observed that it was the swiss diligence: it stopped just
where i was standing; and, on the door being opened, i perceived henry
clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. “my dear
frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad i am to see you! how fortunate
that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting!”

nothing could equal my delight on seeing clerval; his presence brought
back to my thoughts my father, elizabeth, and all those scenes of home
so dear to my recollection. i grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot
my horror and misfortune; i felt suddenly, and for the first time during
many months, calm and serene joy. i welcomed my friend, therefore, in
the most cordial manner, and we walked towards my college. clerval
continued talking for some time about our mutual friends, and his own
good fortune in being permitted to come to ingolstadt. “you may easily
believe,” said he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father
that it was not absolutely necessary for a merchant not to understand
any thing except book-keeping; and, indeed, i believe i left him
incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied
entreaties was the same as that of the dutch schoolmaster in the vicar
of wakefield: ‘i have ten thousand florins a year without greek, i eat
heartily without greek.’ but his affection for me at length overcame his
dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of
discovery to the land of knowledge.”

“it gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left
my father, brothers, and elizabeth.”

“very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from you
so seldom. by the bye, i mean to lecture you a little upon their account
myself.--but, my dear frankenstein,” continued he, stopping short, and
gazing full in my face, “i did not before remark how very ill you
appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
several nights.”

“you have guessed right; i have lately been so deeply engaged in one
occupation, that i have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see:
but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
end, and that i am at length free.”

i trembled excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to
allude to the occurrences of the preceding night. i walked with a quick
pace, and we soon arrived at my college. i then reflected, and the
thought made me shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my
apartment might still be there, alive, and walking about. i dreaded to
behold this monster; but i feared still more that henry should see him.
entreating him therefore to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the
stairs, i darted up towards my own room. my hand was already on the lock
of the door before i recollected myself. i then paused; and a cold
shivering came over me. i threw the door forcibly open, as children are
accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them
on the other side; but nothing appeared. i stepped fearfully in: the
apartment was empty; and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous
guest. i could hardly believe that so great a good-fortune could have
befallen me; but when i became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, i
clapped my hands for joy, and ran down to clerval.

we ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
but i was unable to contain myself. it was not joy only that possessed
me; i felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse
beat rapidly. i was unable to remain for a single instant in the same
place; i jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival;
but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes
for which he could not account; and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
laughter, frightened and astonished him.

“my dear victor,” cried he, “what, for god’s sake, is the matter? do not
laugh in that manner. how ill you are! what is the cause of all this?”

“do not ask me,” cried i, putting my hands before my eyes, for i thought
i saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell.--oh, save
me! save me!” i imagined that the monster seized me; i struggled
furiously, and fell down in a fit.

poor clerval! what must have been his feelings? a meeting, which he
anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. but i was
not the witness of his grief; for i was lifeless, and did not recover my
senses for a long, long time.

this was the commencement of a nervous fever, which confined me for
several months. during all that time henry was my only nurse. i
afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age, and unfitness
for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make
elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
disorder. he knew that i could not have a more kind and attentive nurse
than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not
doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that
he could towards them.

but i was in reality very ill; and surely nothing but the unbounded and
unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life. the
form of the monster on whom i had bestowed existence was for ever before
my eyes, and i raved incessantly concerning him. doubtless my words
surprised henry: he at first believed them to be the wanderings of my
disturbed imagination; but the pertinacity with which i continually
recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed
its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.

by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses, that alarmed and
grieved my friend, i recovered. i remember the first time i became
capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, i
perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared, and that the young
buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. it was a
divine spring; and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. i
felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom
disappeared, and in a short time i became as cheerful as before i was
attacked by the fatal passion.

“dearest clerval,” exclaimed i, “how kind, how very good you are to me.
this whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised
yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. how shall i ever repay
you? i feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which i have
been the occasion; but you will forgive me.”

“you will repay me entirely, if you do not discompose yourself, but get
well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, i
may speak to you on one subject, may i not?”

i trembled. one subject! what could it be? could he allude to an object
on whom i dared not even think?

“compose yourself,” said clerval, who observed my change of colour, “i
will not mention it, if it agitates you; but your father and cousin
would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own
hand-writing. they hardly know how ill you have been, and are uneasy at
your long silence.”

“is that all? my dear henry. how could you suppose that my first thought
would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom i love, and who are
so deserving of my love.”

“if this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to
see a letter that has been lying here some days for you: it is from your
cousin, i believe.”




chapter v.


clerval then put the following letter into my hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

“_to_ v. frankenstein.

“my dear cousin,

“i cannot describe to you the uneasiness we have all felt concerning
your health. we cannot help imagining that your friend clerval conceals
the extent of your disorder: for it is now several months since we have
seen your hand-writing; and all this time you have been obliged to
dictate your letters to henry. surely, victor, you must have been
exceedingly ill; and this makes us all very wretched, as much so nearly
as after the death of your dear mother. my uncle was almost persuaded
that you were indeed dangerously ill, and could hardly be restrained
from undertaking a journey to ingolstadt. clerval always writes that you
are getting better; i eagerly hope that you will confirm this
intelligence soon in your own hand-writing; for indeed, indeed, victor,
we are all very miserable on this account. relieve us from this fear,
and we shall be the happiest creatures in the world. your father’s
health is now so vigorous, that he appears ten years younger since last
winter. ernest also is so much improved, that you would hardly know him:
he is now nearly sixteen, and has lost that sickly appearance which he
had some years ago; he is grown quite robust and active.

“my uncle and i conversed a long time last night about what profession
ernest should follow. his constant illness when young has deprived him
of the habits of application; and now that he enjoys good health, he is
continually in the open air, climbing the hills, or rowing on the lake.
i therefore proposed that he should be a farmer; which you know, cousin,
is a favourite scheme of mine. a farmer’s is a very healthy happy life;
and the least hurtful, or rather the most beneficial profession of any.
my uncle had an idea of his being educated as an advocate, that through
his interest he might become a judge. but, besides that he is not at all
fitted for such an occupation, it is certainly more creditable to
cultivate the earth for the sustenance of man, than to be the confidant,
and sometimes the accomplice, of his vices; which is the profession of a
lawyer. i said, that the employments of a prosperous farmer, if they
were not a more honourable, they were at least a happier species of
occupation than that of a judge, whose misfortune it was always to
meddle with the dark side of human nature. my uncle smiled, and said,
that i ought to be an advocate myself, which put an end to the
conversation on that subject.

“and now i must tell you a little story that will please, and perhaps
amuse you. do you not remember justine moritz? probably you do not; i
will relate her history, therefore, in a few words. madame moritz, her
mother, was a widow with four children, of whom justine was the third.
this girl had always been the favourite of her father; but, through a
strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and, after the
death of m. moritz, treated her very ill. my aunt observed this; and,
when justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow
her to live at her house. the republican institutions of our country
have produced simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in
the great monarchies that surround it. hence there is less distinction
between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders
being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined
and moral. a servant in geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant
in france and england. justine, thus received in our family, learned the
duties of a servant; a condition which, in our fortunate country, does
not include the idea of ignorance, and a sacrifice of the dignity of a
human being.

“after what i have said, i dare say you well remember the heroine of my
little tale: for justine was a great favourite of your’s; and i
recollect you once remarked, that if you were in an ill humour, one
glance from justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that ariosto
gives concerning the beauty of angelica--she looked so frank-hearted and
happy. my aunt conceived a great attachment for her, by which she was
induced to give her an education superior to that which she had at
first intended. this benefit was fully repaid; justine was the most
grateful little creature in the world: i do not mean that she made any
professions, i never heard one pass her lips; but you could see by her
eyes that she almost adored her protectress. although her disposition
was gay, and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest
attention to every gesture of my aunt. she thought her the model of all
excellence, and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so
that even now she often reminds me of her.

“when my dearest aunt died, every one was too much occupied in their own
grief to notice poor justine, who had attended her during her illness
with the most anxious affection. poor justine was very ill; but other
trials were reserved for her.

“one by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. the conscience
of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the deaths of her
favourites was a judgment from heaven to chastise her partiality. she
was a roman catholic; and i believe her confessor confirmed the idea
which she had conceived. accordingly, a few months after your departure
for ingolstadt, justine was called home by her repentant mother. poor
girl! she wept when she quitted our house: she was much altered since
the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to
her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity. nor was her
residence at her mother’s house of a nature to restore her gaiety. the
poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. she sometimes begged
justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of
having caused the deaths of her brothers and sister. perpetual fretting
at length threw madame moritz into a decline, which at first increased
her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever. she died on the
first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of this last winter.
justine has returned to us; and i assure you i love her tenderly. she is
very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as i mentioned before, her
mien and her expressions continually remind me of my dear aunt.

“i must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
william. i wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with
sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eye-lashes, and curling hair. when he
smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with
health. he has already had one or two little _wives_, but louisa biron
is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.

“now, dear victor, i dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip
concerning the good people of geneva. the pretty miss mansfield has
already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage
with a young englishman, john melbourne, esq. her ugly sister, manon,
married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. your favourite
schoolfellow, louis manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the
departure of clerval from geneva. but he has already recovered his
spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a very lively
pretty frenchwoman, madame tavernier. she is a widow, and much older
than manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with every
body.

“i have written myself into good spirits, dear cousin; yet i cannot
conclude without again anxiously inquiring concerning your health. dear
victor, if you are not very ill, write yourself, and make your father
and all of us happy; or----i cannot bear to think of the other side of
the question; my tears already flow. adieu, my dearest cousin.”

“elizabeth lavenza.

“geneva, march 18th, 17--.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“dear, dear elizabeth!” i exclaimed when i had read her letter, “i will
write instantly, and relieve them from the anxiety they must feel.” i
wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but my convalescence had
commenced, and proceeded regularly. in another fortnight i was able to
leave my chamber.

one of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the
several professors of the university. in doing this, i underwent a kind
of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained.
ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the beginning of
my misfortunes, i had conceived a violent antipathy even to the name of
natural philosophy. when i was otherwise quite restored to health, the
sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous
symptoms. henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view.
he had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that i had acquired a
dislike for the room which had previously been my laboratory. but these
cares of clerval were made of no avail when i visited the professors. m.
waldman inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the
astonishing progress i had made in the sciences. he soon perceived that
i disliked the subject; but, not guessing the real cause, he attributed
my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement to
the science itself, with a desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing me
out. what could i do? he meant to please, and he tormented me. i felt as
if he had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments
which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel
death. i writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain i felt.
clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn. i
thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak. i saw plainly that
he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and
although i loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew
no bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide to him that
event which was so often present to my recollection, but which i feared
the detail to another would only impress more deeply.

m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me
even more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman. “d--n the
fellow!” cried he; “why, m. clerval, i assure you he has outstript us
all. aye, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. a youngster
who, but a few years ago, believed cornelius agrippa as firmly as the
gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if he is
not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.--aye, aye,”
continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, “m.
frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man. young men
should be diffident of themselves, you know, m. clerval; i was myself
when young: but that wears out in a very short time.”

m. krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.

clerval was no natural philosopher. his imagination was too vivid for
the minutiæ of science. languages were his principal study; and he
sought, by acquiring their elements, to open a field for
self-instruction on his return to geneva. persian, arabic, and hebrew,
gained his attention, after he had made himself perfectly master of
greek and latin. for my own part, idleness had ever been irksome to me;
and now that i wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former
studies, i felt great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend,
and found not only instruction but consolation in the works of the
orientalists. their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating to a
degree i never experienced in studying the authors of any other country.
when you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and
garden of roses,--in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire
that consumes your own heart. how different from the manly and heroical
poetry of greece and rome.

summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to geneva was
fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable,
and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. i felt this delay
very bitterly; for i longed to see my native town, and my beloved
friends. my return had only been delayed so long from an unwillingness
to leave clerval in a strange place, before he had become acquainted
with any of its inhabitants. the winter, however, was spent cheerfully;
and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came, its beauty
compensated for its dilatoriness.

the month of may had already commenced, and i expected the letter daily
which was to fix the date of my departure, when henry proposed a
pedestrian tour in the environs of ingolstadt that i might bid a
personal farewell to the country i had so long inhabited. i acceded
with pleasure to this proposition: i was fond of exercise, and clerval
had always been my favourite companion in the rambles of this nature
that i had taken among the scenes of my native country.

we passed a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits had
long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the
salubrious air i breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and
the conversation of my friend. study had before secluded me from the
intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial; but
clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught me
to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
excellent friend! how sincerely did you love me, and endeavour to
elevate my mind, until it was on a level with your own. a selfish
pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and affection
warmed and opened my senses; i became the same happy creature who, a few
years ago, loving and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. when happy,
inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful
sensations. a serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstacy. the
present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the
hedges, while those of summer were already in bud: i was undisturbed by
thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me,
notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an invincible
burden.

henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathized in my feelings:
he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that
filled his soul. the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often,
in imitation of the persian and arabic writers, he invented tales of
wonderful fancy and passion. at other times he repeated my favourite
poems, or drew me out into arguments, which he supported with great
ingenuity.

we returned to our college on a sunday afternoon: the peasants were
dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. my own spirits
were high, and i bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and
hilarity.




chapter vi.


on my return, i found the following letter from my father:--

       *       *       *       *       *

“_to_ v. frankenstein.

“my dear victor,

“you have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of
your return to us; and i was at first tempted to write only a few lines,
merely mentioning the day on which i should expect you. but that would
be a cruel kindness, and i dare not do it. what would be your surprise,
my son, when you expected a happy and gay welcome, to behold, on the
contrary, tears and wretchedness? and how, victor, can i relate our
misfortune? absence cannot have rendered you callous to our joys and
griefs; and how shall i inflict pain on an absent child? i wish to
prepare you for the woeful news, but i know it is impossible; even now
your eye skims over the page, to seek the words which are to convey to
you the horrible tidings.

“william is dead!--that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed
my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! victor, he is murdered!

“i will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
circumstances of the transaction.

“last thursday (may 7th) i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
walk in plainpalais. the evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
our walk farther than usual. it was already dusk before we thought of
returning; and then we discovered that william and ernest, who had gone
on before, were not to be found. we accordingly rested on a seat until
they should return. presently ernest came, and inquired if we had seen
his brother: he said, that they had been playing together, that william
had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and
afterwards waited for him a long time, but that he did not return.

“this account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
until night fell, when elizabeth conjectured that he might have returned
to the house. he was not there. we returned again, with torches; for i
could not rest, when i thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and
was exposed to all the damps and dews of night: elizabeth also suffered
extreme anguish. about five in the morning i discovered my lovely boy,
whom the night before i had seen blooming and active in health,
stretched on the grass livid and motionless: the print of the murderer’s
finger was on his neck.

“he was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
countenance betrayed the secret to elizabeth. she was very earnest to
see the corpse. at first i attempted to prevent her; but she persisted,
and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the
victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘o god! i have murdered my
darling infant!’

“she fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. when she again
lived, it was only to weep and sigh. she told me, that that same evening
william had teazed her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that
she possessed of your mother. this picture is gone, and was doubtless
the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. we have no trace of
him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted;
but they will not restore my beloved william.

“come, dearest victor; you alone can console elizabeth. she weeps
continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death; her
words pierce my heart. we are all unhappy; but will not that be an
additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? your
dear mother! alas, victor! i now say, thank god she did not live to
witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!

“come, victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
festering the wounds of our minds. enter the house of mourning, my
friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not
with hatred for your enemies.

“your affectionate and afflicted father,

“alphonse frankenstein.

“geneva, may 12th, 17--.”

       *       *       *       *       *

clerval, who had watched my countenance as i read this letter, was
surprised to observe the despair that succeeded to the joy i at first
expressed on receiving news from my friends. i threw the letter on the
table, and covered my face with my hands.

“my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed henry, when he perceived me weep with
bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? my dear friend, what has
happened?”

i motioned to him to take up the letter, while i walked up and down the
room in the extremest agitation. tears also gushed from the eyes of
clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune.

“i can offer you no consolation, my friend,” said he; “your disaster is
irreparable. what do you intend to do?”

“to go instantly to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.”

during our walk, clerval endeavoured to raise my spirits. he did not do
this by common topics of consolation, but by exhibiting the truest
sympathy. “poor william!” said he, “that dear child; he now sleeps with
his angel mother. his friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest: he does
not now feel the murderer’s grasp; a sod covers his gentle form, and he
knows no pain. he can no longer be a fit subject for pity; the survivors
are the greatest sufferers, and for them time is the only consolation.
those maxims of the stoics, that death was no evil, and that the mind of
man ought to be superior to despair on the eternal absence of a beloved
object, ought not to be urged. even cato wept over the dead body of his
brother.”

clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
impressed themselves on my mind, and i remembered them afterwards in
solitude. but now, as soon as the horses arrived, i hurried into a
cabriole, and bade farewell to my friend.

my journey was very melancholy. at first i wished to hurry on, for i
longed to console and sympathize with my loved and sorrowing friends;
but when i drew near my native town, i slackened my progress. i could
hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. i
passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which i had not seen for
nearly six years. how altered every thing might be during that time? one
sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little
circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations which,
although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive.
fear overcame me; i dared not advance, dreading a thousand nameless
evils that made me tremble, although i was unable to define them.

i remained two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind. i
contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm, and
the snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. by
degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and i continued my
journey towards geneva.

the road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as i
approached my native town. i discovered more distinctly the black sides
of jura, and the bright summit of mont blânc; i wept like a child: “dear
mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your wanderer? your
summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and placid. is this to
prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?”

i fear, my friend, that i shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
happiness, and i think of them with pleasure. my country, my beloved
country! who but a native can tell the delight i took in again beholding
thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely lake.

yet, as i drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. night also
closed around; and when i could hardly see the dark mountains, i felt
still more gloomily. the picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil,
and i foresaw obscurely that i was destined to become the most wretched
of human beings. alas! i prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
circumstance, that in all the misery i imagined and dreaded, i did not
conceive the hundredth part of the anguish i was destined to endure.

it was completely dark when i arrived in the environs of geneva; the
gates of the town were already shut; and i was obliged to pass the night
at secheron, a village half a league to the east of the city. the sky
was serene; and, as i was unable to rest, i resolved to visit the spot
where my poor william had been murdered. as i could not pass through the
town, i was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at
plainpalais. during this short voyage i saw the lightnings playing on
the summit of mont blânc in the most beautiful figures. the storm
appeared to approach rapidly; and, on landing, i ascended a low hill,
that i might observe its progress. it advanced; the heavens were
clouded, and i soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its
violence quickly increased.

i quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash
over my head. it was echoed from salêve, the juras, and the alps of
savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
from the preceding flash. the storm, as is often the case in
switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. the most
violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over that part of the lake
which lies between the promontory of belrive and the village of copêt.
another storm enlightened jura with faint flashes; and another darkened
and sometimes disclosed the môle, a peaked mountain to the east of the
lake.

while i watched the storm, so beautiful yet terrific, i wandered on with
a hasty step. this noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; i clasped
my hands, and exclaimed aloud, “william, dear angel! this is thy
funeral, this thy dirge!” as i said these words, i perceived in the
gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; i stood
fixed, gazing intently: i could not be mistaken. a flash of lightning
illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its
gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect, more hideous than
belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the
filthy dæmon to whom i had given life. what did he there? could he be (i
shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? no sooner did
that idea cross my imagination, than i became convinced of its truth; my
teeth chattered, and i was forced to lean against a tree for support.
the figure passed me quickly, and i lost it in the gloom. nothing in
human shape could have destroyed that fair child. _he_ was the murderer!
i could not doubt it. the mere presence of the idea was an irresistible
proof of the fact. i thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have
been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me hanging among the
rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of mont salêve, a hill that
bounds plainpalais on the south. he soon reached the summit, and
disappeared.

i remained motionless. the thunder ceased; but the rain still continued,
and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. i revolved in
my mind the events which i had until now sought to forget: the whole
train of my progress towards the creation; the appearance of the work of
my own hands alive at my bed side; its departure. two years had now
nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and was
this his first crime? alas! i had turned loose into the world a depraved
wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my
brother?

no one can conceive the anguish i suffered during the remainder of the
night, which i spent, cold and wet, in the open air. but i did not feel
the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in scenes of
evil and despair. i considered the being whom i had cast among mankind,
and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such
as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own
vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy
all that was dear to me.

day dawned; and i directed my steps towards the town. the gates were
open; and i hastened to my father’s house. my first thought was to
discover what i knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
made. but i paused when i reflected on the story that i had to tell. a
being whom i myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at
midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. i remembered
also the nervous fever with which i had been seized just at the time
that i dated my creation, and which would give an air of delirium to a
tale otherwise so utterly improbable. i well knew that if any other had
communicated such a relation to me, i should have looked upon it as the
ravings of insanity. besides, the strange nature of the animal would
elude all pursuit, even if i were so far credited as to persuade my
relatives to commence it. besides, of what use would be pursuit? who
could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of mont
salêve? these reflections determined me, and i resolved to remain
silent.

it was about five in the morning when i entered my father’s house. i
told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
to attend their usual hour of rising.

six years had elapsed, passed as a dream but for one indelible trace,
and i stood in the same place where i had last embraced my father before
my departure for ingolstadt. beloved and respectable parent! he still
remained to me. i gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over
the mantle-piece. it was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
desire, and represented caroline beaufort in an agony of despair,
kneeling by the coffin of her dead father. her garb was rustic, and her
cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly
permitted the sentiment of pity. below this picture was a miniature of
william; and my tears flowed when i looked upon it. while i was thus
engaged, ernest entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome
me. he expressed a sorrowful delight to see me: “welcome, my dearest
victor,” said he. “ah! i wish you had come three months ago, and then
you would have found us all joyous and delighted. but we are now
unhappy; and, i am afraid, tears instead of smiles will be your welcome.
our father looks so sorrowful: this dreadful event seems to have revived
in his mind his grief on the death of mamma. poor elizabeth also is
quite inconsolable.” ernest began to weep as he said these words.

“do not,” said i, “welcome me thus; try to be more calm, that i may not
be absolutely miserable the moment i enter my father’s house after so
long an absence. but, tell me, how does my father support his
misfortunes? and how is my poor elizabeth?”

“she indeed requires consolation; she accused herself of having caused
the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched. but since the
murderer has been discovered----”

“the murderer discovered! good god! how can that be? who could attempt
to pursue him? it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw.”

“i do not know what you mean; but we were all very unhappy when she was
discovered. no one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth
will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. indeed, who
would credit that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all
the family, could all at once become so extremely wicked?”

“justine moritz! poor, poor girl, is she the accused? but it is
wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, ernest?”

“no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
almost forced conviction upon us: and her own behaviour has been so
confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, i fear,
leaves no hope for doubt. but she will be tried to-day, and you will
then hear all.”

he related that, the morning on which the murder of poor william had
been discovered, justine had been taken ill, and confined to her bed;
and, after several days, one of the servants, happening to examine the
apparel she had worn on the night of the murder, had discovered in her
pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the
temptation of the murderer. the servant instantly shewed it to one of
the others, who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a
magistrate; and, upon their deposition, justine was apprehended. on
being charged with the fact, the poor girl confirmed the suspicion in a
great measure by her extreme confusion of manner.

this was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and i replied
earnestly, “you are all mistaken; i know the murderer. justine, poor,
good justine, is innocent.”

at that instant my father entered. i saw unhappiness deeply impressed on
his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and, after
we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced some other
topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed, “good god,
papa! victor says that he knows who was the murderer of poor william.”

“we do also, unfortunately,” replied my father; “for indeed i had rather
have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and
ingratitude in one i valued so highly.”

“my dear father, you are mistaken; justine is innocent.”

“if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty. she is to be
tried to-day, and i hope, i sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.”

this speech calmed me. i was firmly convinced in my own mind that
justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. i
had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
brought forward strong enough to convict her; and, in this assurance, i
calmed myself, expecting the trial with eagerness, but without
prognosticating an evil result.

we were soon joined by elizabeth. time had made great alterations in her
form since i had last beheld her. six years before she had been a
pretty, good-humoured girl, whom every one loved and caressed. she was
now a woman in stature and expression of countenance, which was
uncommonly lovely. an open and capacious forehead gave indications of a
good understanding, joined to great frankness of disposition. her eyes
were hazel, and expressive of mildness, now through recent affliction
allied to sadness. her hair was of a rich, dark auburn, her complexion
fair, and her figure slight and graceful. she welcomed me with the
greatest affection. “your arrival, my dear cousin,” said she, “fills me
with hope. you perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless
justine. alas! who is safe, if she be convicted of crime? i rely on her
innocence as certainly as i do upon my own. our misfortune is doubly
hard to us; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor
girl, whom i sincerely love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate. if
she is condemned, i never shall know joy more. but she will not, i am
sure she will not; and then i shall be happy again, even after the sad
death of my little william.”

“she is innocent, my elizabeth,” said i, “and that shall be proved;
fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her
acquittal.”

“how kind you are! every one else believes in her guilt, and that made
me wretched; for i knew that it was impossible: and to see every one
else prejudiced in so deadly a manner, rendered me hopeless and
despairing.” she wept.

“sweet niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. if she is, as you
believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our judges, and the activity
with which i shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality.”




chapter vii.


we passed a few sad hours, until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to
commence. my father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
as witnesses, i accompanied them to the court. during the whole of this
wretched mockery of justice, i suffered living torture. it was to be
decided, whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
cause the death of two of my fellow-beings: one a smiling babe, full of
innocence and joy; the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
justine also was a girl of merit, and possessed qualities which promised
to render her life happy: now all was to be obliterated in an
ignominious grave; and i the cause! a thousand times rather would i have
confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to justine; but i was
absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have been
considered as the ravings of a madman, and would not have exculpated her
who suffered through me.

the appearance of justine was calm. she was dressed in mourning; and her
countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
feelings, exquisitely beautiful. yet she appeared confident in
innocence, and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
thousands; for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
excited, was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. she was
tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her
confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up
her mind to an appearance of courage. when she entered the court, she
threw her eyes round it, and quickly discovered where we were seated. a
tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us; but she quickly recovered
herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest her utter
guiltlessness.

the trial began; and after the advocate against her had stated the
charge, several witnesses were called. several strange facts combined
against her, which might have staggered any one who had not such proof
of her innocence as i had. she had been out the whole of the night on
which the murder had been committed, and towards morning had been
perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
murdered child had been afterwards found. the woman asked her what she
did there; but she looked very strangely, and only returned a confused
and unintelligible answer. she returned to the house about eight
o’clock; and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
replied, that she had been looking for the child, and demanded
earnestly, if any thing had been heard concerning him. when shewn the
body, she fell into violent hysterics, and kept her bed for several
days. the picture was then produced, which the servant had found in her
pocket; and when elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the
same which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed
round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.

justine was called on for her defence. as the trial had proceeded, her
countenance had altered. surprise, horror, and misery, were strongly
expressed. sometimes she struggled with her tears; but when she was
desired to plead, she collected her powers, and spoke in an audible
although variable voice:--

“god knows,” she said, “how entirely i am innocent. but i do not pretend
that my protestations should acquit me: i rest my innocence on a plain
and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced against me;
and i hope the character i have always borne will incline my judges to a
favourable interpretation, where any circumstance appears doubtful or
suspicious.”

she then related that, by the permission of elizabeth, she had passed
the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed, at the
house of an aunt at chêne, a village situated at about a league from
geneva. on her return, at about nine o’clock, she met a man, who asked
her if she had seen any thing of the child who was lost. she was alarmed
by this account, and passed several hours in looking for him, when the
gates of geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain several hours of
the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up
the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. unable to rest or sleep,
she quitted her asylum early, that she might again endeavour to find my
brother. if she had gone near the spot where his body lay, it was
without her knowledge. that she had been bewildered when questioned by
the market-woman, was not surprising, since she had passed a sleepless
night, and the fate of poor william was yet uncertain. concerning the
picture she could give no account.

“i know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and fatally this
one circumstance weighs against me, but i have no power of explaining
it; and when i have expressed my utter ignorance, i am only left to
conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
placed in my pocket. but here also i am checked. i believe that i have
no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to
destroy me wantonly. did the murderer place it there? i know of no
opportunity afforded him for so doing; or if i had, why should he have
stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon?

“i commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet i see no room for
hope. i beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my
character; and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt,
i must be condemned, although i would pledge my salvation on my
innocence.”

several witnesses were called, who had known her for many years, and
they spoke well of her; but fear, and hatred of the crime of which they
supposed her guilty, rendered them timorous, and unwilling to come
forward. elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent
dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the
court.

“i am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or
rather his sister, for i was educated by and have lived with his parents
ever since and even long before his birth. it may therefore be judged
indecent in me to come forward on this occasion; but when i see a
fellow-creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended
friends, i wish to be allowed to speak, that i may say what i know of
her character. i am well acquainted with the accused. i have lived in
the same house with her, at one time for five, and at another for nearly
two years. during all that period she appeared to me the most amiable
and benevolent of human creatures. she nursed madame frankenstein, my
aunt, in her last illness with the greatest affection and care; and
afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner
that excited the admiration of all who knew her. after which she again
lived in my uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. she
was warmly attached to the child who is now dead, and acted towards him
like a most affectionate mother. for my own part, i do not hesitate to
say, that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, i
believe and rely on her perfect innocence. she had no temptation for
such an action: as to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she
had earnestly desired it, i should have willingly given it to her; so
much do i esteem and value her.”

excellent elizabeth! a murmur of approbation was heard; but it was
excited by her generous interference, and not in favour of poor justine,
on whom the public indignation was turned with renewed violence,
charging her with the blackest ingratitude. she herself wept as
elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. my own agitation and anguish
was extreme during the whole trial. i believed in her innocence; i knew
it. could the dæmon, who had (i did not for a minute doubt) murdered my
brother, also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death
and ignominy. i could not sustain the horror of my situation; and when i
perceived that the popular voice, and the countenances of the judges,
had already condemned my unhappy victim, i rushed out of the court in
agony. the tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained
by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom, and would not
forego their hold.

i passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. in the morning i went to the
court; my lips and throat were parched. i dared not ask the fatal
question; but i was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
visit. the ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and justine was
condemned.

i cannot pretend to describe what i then felt. i had before experienced
sensations of horror; and i have endeavoured to bestow upon them
adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
heart-sickening despair that i then endured. the person to whom i
addressed myself added, that justine had already confessed her guilt.
“that evidence,” he observed, “was hardly required in so glaring a case,
but i am glad of it; and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a
criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.”

when i returned home, elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.

“my cousin,” replied i, “it is decided as you may have expected; all
judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer, than that one guilty
should escape. but she has confessed.”

this was a dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had relied with firmness
upon justine’s innocence. “alas!” said she, “how shall i ever again
believe in human benevolence? justine, whom i loved and esteemed as my
sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray;
her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or ill-humour, and yet
she has committed a murder.”

soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a wish to see my
cousin. my father wished her not to go; but said, that he left it to her
own judgment and feelings to decide. “yes,” said elizabeth, “i will go,
although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompany me: i cannot go
alone.” the idea of this visit was torture to me, yet i could not
refuse.

we entered the gloomy prison-chamber, and beheld justine sitting on some
straw at the further end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested
on her knees. she rose on seeing us enter; and when we were left alone
with her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weeping bitterly.
my cousin wept also.

“oh, justine!” said she, “why did you rob me of my last consolation. i
relied on your innocence; and although i was then very wretched, i was
not so miserable as i am now.”

“and do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked? do you also
join with my enemies to crush me?” her voice was suffocated with sobs.

“rise, my poor girl,” said elizabeth, “why do you kneel, if you are
innocent? i am not one of your enemies; i believed you guiltless,
notwithstanding every evidence, until i heard that you had yourself
declared your guilt. that report, you say, is false; and be assured,
dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment,
but your own confession.”

“i did confess; but i confessed a lie. i confessed, that i might obtain
absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my
other sins. the god of heaven forgive me! ever since i was condemned, my
confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until i almost
began to think that i was the monster that he said i was. he threatened
excommunication and hell fire in my last moments, if i continued
obdurate. dear lady, i had none to support me; all looked on me as a
wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. what could i do? in an evil
hour i subscribed to a lie; and now only am i truly miserable.”

she paused, weeping, and then continued--“i thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed aunt
had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a
crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. dear
william! dearest blessed child! i soon shall see you again in heaven,
where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as i am to
suffer ignominy and death.”

“oh, justine! forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you. why
did you confess? but do not mourn, my dear girl; i will every where
proclaim your innocence, and force belief. yet you must die; you, my
playfellow, my companion, my more than sister. i never can survive so
horrible a misfortune.”

“dear, sweet elizabeth, do not weep. you ought to raise me with thoughts
of a better life, and elevate me from the petty cares of this world of
injustice and strife. do not you, excellent friend, drive me to
despair.”

“i will try to comfort you; but this, i fear, is an evil too deep and
poignant to admit of consolation, for there is no hope. yet heaven
bless thee, my dearest justine, with resignation, and a confidence
elevated beyond this world. oh! how i hate its shews and mockeries! when
one creature is murdered, another is immediately deprived of life in a
slow torturing manner; then the executioners, their hands yet reeking
with the blood of innocence, believe that they have done a great deed.
they call this _retribution_. hateful name! when that word is
pronounced, i know greater and more horrid punishments are going to be
inflicted than the gloomiest tyrant has ever invented to satiate his
utmost revenge. yet this is not consolation for you, my justine, unless
indeed that you may glory in escaping from so miserable a den. alas! i
would i were in peace with my aunt and my lovely william, escaped from a
world which is hateful to me, and the visages of men which i abhor.”

justine smiled languidly. “this, dear lady, is despair, and not
resignation. i must not learn the lesson that you would teach me. talk
of something else, something that will bring peace, and not increase of
misery.”

during this conversation i had retired to a corner of the prison-room,
where i could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. despair! who
dared talk of that? the poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the
dreary boundary between life and death, felt not as i did, such deep and
bitter agony. i gnashed my teeth, and ground them together, uttering a
groan that came from my inmost soul. justine started. when she saw who
it was, she approached me, and said, “dear sir, you are very kind to
visit me; you, i hope, do not believe that i am guilty.”

i could not answer. “no, justine,” said elizabeth; “he is more convinced
of your innocence than i was; for even when he heard that you had
confessed, he did not credit it.”

“i truly thank him. in these last moments i feel the sincerest gratitude
towards those who think of me with kindness. how sweet is the affection
of others to such a wretch as i am! it removes more than half my
misfortune; and i feel as if i could die in peace, now that my innocence
is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”
